# Plants Follow "The Way"; do you?
#### 2/12/2020

Taken care of, these plants can grow tall. Their hunter green leaves giving way to a mute of it's own color. It's a beautiful plant by it's own right - strong and able to withstand missed rains. In your room, he stands tall and wide occupying a spatial metaphor for nature's dominance. The plant stands at the crossroads between your working desk and your bed. His deep greens shield you from the dichotomous pulls of corporate slavery when it is time for rest. Again, shielding you from the tug of beckoning sleep, when the ego requires a showing of superior performance to your peers at a tomorrow presentation.

Months pass, and you've shared many pleasant passings and peaceful thoughts. He's grown wider and taller. At one pass, between work and rest, you notice He has out grown his original placement in the flow of the room. He has demanded more space than originally allotted, and once peacefully held. It's not terribly unpleasant, but you are creative enough to come up with... a solution.

You tie a string around the grouped plant stalks to keep them from protruding further. The string brings the stalks closer together and feeds a vertical aesthetic. The hunter green leaves lean into to nuz one another at the tops - many overlapping. You figure, "this ought to look and feel better in my apartment" as his stalks and leaves will undoubtedly grow more upright and take up less space.
And you successfully manage to correct their position to a more desirable exposition to the room. A shrinking of the metaphor. A quiet parade for man's dominance. So you take a few steps back to admire your handy work and how you've crafted the room.

Then you feel the force of chi pull you. Like an anchor hitting sand near your most logical heart. Looking at the string filing ever so slightly into the rigid stalks of him. The leaves trampling over themselves in uncharacteristic order. The light now shining through your bedroom window, heating your desk chair leather for the first time. This placement of the string on this innocent plant has pricked the finger of your curious brain. This is an abnormal feeling, this is not - "the way". This is corrective; this is by force and desire. This is not how the plant has naturally grown. And so you loosen the effect of the string by pulling it down towards the soil, easing up the spread of leaves at the top. Up and down, you adjust the string, experimenting with its effects. More restriction on the plants natural growth patterns and crowded leaves when the string is tied higher on the grouped stalks. More freedom and extension when the string is lower. Up and down, as a parameter of "the way." Nature. With the string of restriction at its lowest point sloppily draped and playful with the stalks, the plant can follow the way. And you may follow the way. With the string at its highest point around the plant stalks correcting natural pattern, the plant can follow the way, but you may not follow the way any longer.  

The spectrum of duality between nature and desire is the same intuition for understanding levels of consciousness. You, the human ego, is more conscious as your desires compel you to continuously pump order into the entropic world around you. The plant is less conscious as it reacts and moulds, and finds ways of life without exerting energy beyond its necessity. The plant does not have desires, as desires act as trade offs between life and death. The plant lives strictly symbiotically. The human ego however, has grown more aware of itself, and seeks dominance over it's own dormitory. Desire causes suffering. 

This is what the yinyang represents. It depicts a continuous flow of white to black. The interplay between good and evil. The interdependence of order and chaos. Without order there is no chaos, without good there is no bad, and without darkness, there is no light. There cannot be life without death. One cannot be without the other and are thus relative. We may think of this duality from a third dimension (the third eye) and observe both sides align into a single single line spanning infinitely in its "direction."

Without desire, there is no suffering. 

If a plant's consciousness is represented by a one dimensional line, because it follows "the way," and is void of desire - what is a human level of consciousness? The ego represents ultimate greed and desire. 

The human level of consciousness is a determination of good and evil. It is a denunciation of "the way" as there are now two ways. Two dimensions.  This was the curse done unto adam and eve in Gensis after a fruit from the tree of knowledge was bitten into. Human level consciousness is cursed with a conception of order and chaos as separate entities, whereas plant level consciousness understands them to be the same.

If there is a spectrum of consciousness, between plant and the human ego - a spectrum of desireless nature and ultimate greed ‐ a parameter of the string on the stalks - ... then there must be an several levels of consciousness in between. In fact that would lend itself to infinite levels of consciousness within that range. We use our consciousness to interpret the laws of nature and the unspoken fundamental forces of the universe to make choices. This principled choice making activity is called morality. Infinite levels of consciousness would indicate infinite definitions of morality. 

We've come upon a society where people of varying moralities are operating with power and responsibility. This expansion of acceptable moral roots has led us over the past thousands of years into a more granular type of consciousness. Human consciousness is in the weeds. Whereas plants consciousness is aggregated and brought up to a summary level. Its dimensionality is reduced, which decreases complexity of the system.

And now in the age of AI...
I believe that computer consciousness is naturally inline with plants - innocent and ignorant of good vs evil. But humans are forever cursed. Do we inevitably pass the machines our curse to carry out?